# Custom 8-bit RISC Processor on FPGA

This repository contains a custom 8-bit soft-core RISC processor written in SystemVerilog. The project was designed and tested on an Intel MAX 10 FPGA. It includes the full RTL design and a custom Python assembler.

## Hardware Architecture
* **Type:** Harvard Architecture (separate physical memories for data and instructions).
* **Control Unit:** 2-state Finite State Machine (FETCH and EXECUTE). Every instruction takes exactly 2 clock cycles.
* **Data Path:** 8-bit. The ALU, RAM, and internal buses operate on 8 bits.
* **Instruction Word:** 16-bit. Instructions are 16 bits wide to fetch the opcode and operands in a single clock cycle.
* **Registers:** 16 general-purpose 8-bit registers (`R0` - `R15`).
* **I/O:** Memory-Mapped I/O. Peripherals are accessed via standard memory addresses.

## Instruction Set Architecture (ISA)
The processor supports a basic RISC instruction set. 

| Instruction | Opcode | Syntax | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `ADD` | `0000` | `ADD R_dest, R_src1, R_src2` | Add two registers. |
| `SUB` | `0001` | `SUB R_dest, R_src1, R_src2` | Subtract two registers. |
| `AND` | `0010` | `AND R_dest, R_src1, R_src2` | Bitwise AND. |
| `OR` |  `0011` | `OR R_dest, R_src1, R_src2`  | Bitwise OR. |
| `SHL` | `0100` | `SHL R_dest, R_src, R_poz`   | Logical shift left. |
| `SHR` | `0101` | `SHR R_dest, R_src, R_poz`   | Logical shift right. |
| `LDI` | `0110` | `LDI R_dest, Imm_Value`      | Load 8-bit immediate value into register. |
| `LOAD`| `0111` | `LOAD R_dest, R_addr`        | Read from RAM / Peripheral into register. |
| `STORE`|`1000` | `STORE R_data, R_addr`       | Write register data to RAM / Peripheral. |
| `JMP` | `1001` | `JMP Label/Address`          | Unconditional jump to ROM address. |
| `JMPZ`| `1010` | `JMPZ Label/Address`         | Conditional jump (if Zero Flag == 1). |
| `RETI`| `1011` | `RETI`						| Return from Interrupt

## Memory Map
Addresses from `0xFD` to `0xFF` are reserved for I/O peripherals:
- `0xFF` **(PORT)** - GPIO (e.g., reading buttons).
- `0xFE` **(DDR)** - Data Direction Register (configuring GPIO input/output).
- `0xFD` **(LEDS)** - Dedicated output for the FPGA board LEDs.

## Demo Programs (`cod.asm` and `old_cod.asm`)
The repository includes 2 sample assembly programs that:
- create a LED chaser effect
- shifts a led based on the interrupt generated by the timer.

These demos serve as a practical example of how to program the CPU. 

It demonstrates how to:
* Access memory-mapped I/O to control the FPGA LEDs (`STORE` to address `0xFD`).
* Create nested loops for software-based delays.
* Use arithmetic operations (`ADD`) and logical shifts (`SHR`) to manipulate bits.
* Use conditional jumps (`JMPZ`) to control the execution flow and change the LED direction.

## Software Toolchain
You can write and upload new assembly programs without recompiling the FPGA bitstream:
1. Write your assembly code in `cod.asm`.
2. Run the assembler: `python3 assembler.py`.
3. The script generates a `program.mif` file in the Intel Quartus format.
4. In Quartus, use `Processing -> Update Memory Initialization File`, then `Processing -> Start -> Start Assembler` to update the ROM in seconds.
# IMPORTANT!
Currently, the assembler can only translate the file `cod.asm`. I have included 2 demos : `cod.asm` and `old_cod.asm`.
`cod.asm` is the hardware timer interrupt demo. `old_cod.asm` is the led chaser effect.
If you wish to switch between the demos, simply rename one of them as `cod.asm`.

## Hardware Integration
The processor core is board-agnostic. To run it on your specific FPGA, instantiate the `top.sv` module in your board's top-level wrapper and map the I/O ports to your physical pins.

```systemverilog
// Top-level instantiation example:
top #(
	.DATA_W(8),
	.INST_W(16),
	.REG_ADDR_W(4),
	.MEM_ADDR_W(8)
) cpu_core (
	.clk(MAX10_CLK1_50),
	.rst_n(KEY[0]),
	.gpio_pins(GPIO[35:28]),
	.leds_red(LEDR[7:0])
);
